## Research

I study the part of the brain that is responsible for our sense of hearing: the auditory cortex. During my PhD, I looked at how this brain region is different when someone becomes deaf early in life. My research indicated that early deafness causes parts of the auditory cortex reorganize for vision instead of audition, and this may support improved visual motion detection (more on that below). 

In deaf people, it was specifically the posterior auditory cortex that reorganized. In hearing people, this brain region is typically active in response to sound location. However, we know  little about how this auditory spatial information is used by the brain. Since completing my PhD, I have been working on this question.

### Current Work: Auditory spatial processing for scene analysis and localization

Posterior auditory cortex, which was the focus of my Ph.D. research, is activated in all types of auditory tasks, but it is especially well-known for being sensitive to sounds that originate from different locations. When our brain gets spatial information about a sound, it can use that information to help us locate interesting events and objects in our environment, a process called localization. But our brains can also use spatial information to help us group sounds into different objects and make sense of them. In my recent work, I used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure brain activity while people listened to two concurrent sounds coming from different locations. By looking at the activity patterns, we could determine how far apart the two sounds were, but not where the sounds were coming from. This might mean that the brain's code for auditory space reflects distance between sounds, rather than locations. 

### Past Work:

### The auditory cortex of deaf people reorganizes to process visual motion.

In deaf people, the structures of the auditory cortex still exist, but since these structures don't get any input from the ears, they can change their function to do other things. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), I measured activity in the brain's of deaf people while they watched moving objects. I found that posterior regions of the auditory cortex were activated by visual motion instead of sound. The activity of here also correlated with activity in the visual cortex, which meant that the auditory and visual circuitry were communicating more in deaf people. The degree of these changes varied with the amount of residual hearing that each individual had: the more deaf a person was over their lifetime, the more the auditory cortex was involved in visual processing.[<sup>1</sup>](http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/jocn_a_00683#.V7m_Jz4rK2w)

### Deaf people are better than hearing people at detecting visual motion.
Since deaf people had extra brain areas involved in visual motion processing, I wanted to see if they actually had better vision too. I tested deaf and hearing people on a task that measured the smallest amount of visual motion that could be detected, and found that deaf people were more sensitive to visual motion than hearing people.[<sup>2</sup>](http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0090498) We suspect that this extra sensitivity is supported by reorganization of the auditory cortex, and that it helps deaf people detect interesting events in the environment, which may partially compensate for their lack of hearing.

### The anatomy of the auditory cortex changes according to how well deaf people detect visual motion.
Finally, I wanted to understand what changes in the auditory cortex of deaf people were related to their enhanced visual motion detection ability. For this, I used MRI to measure the structure of two different types of tissue in the brain: grey and white matter. Grey matter tissue contains all of the cell bodies of the neurons, which are the building-blocks of the brain that generate its activity. Grey matter is primarily situated on the outside surface of the brain, and encapsulates the white matter, which contains all of the connections between neurons across different parts of the cortex.

I found that the visual motion detection ability of deaf people correlated with the thickness of their grey matter in the posterior auditory cortex,[<sup>3</sup>](http://www.hindawi.com/journals/np/2016/7217630/abs/) the same region that was active in response to visual motion. Individuals with better motion sensitivity had thicker grey matter. Likewise, the integrity of the white matter in this region correlated with visual motion detection ability.[<sup>4</sup>](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378595516301198) These correlations support the hypothesis that posterior auditory cortex reorganizes to support the improved visual abilities of deaf people, and give some indication of the underlying structural changes that facilitate this plasticity.

### Deaf and hearing people can synchronize to music felt through the floor.
With evidence that the auditory cortex reorganized in deaf people to support vision, I wondered if it could also support other senses, like the sense of touch. If that was the case, then it might be that deaf people used touch to compensate for their lack of hearing under certain circumstances. One possible scenario for this would be in a typical social dance enviroment, where a group of people are synchronizing dance moves to a musical beat. If the music is loud enough, you can often feel the beat through the vibrations in the floor. 

To test if deaf people could synchronize to "musical" vibrations felt through the floor, we used a special platform that translated musical tracks into vibrations that were similar to those experienced through a floor. We asked our participants to bounce to the beat, and recorded their movements. We found that both deaf and hearing people could synchronize to vibrations, which indicated that this ability does not depend on previous experience with sound. Since deaf people were no better than hearing people, there is no evidence that the auditory cortex of deaf people reorganizes to support the ability synchronize. However, we did find that hearing people were better at synchronizing to music that they hear as compared to music that they feel, which may mean that our sense of hearing is just better than other senses for coordinating movements.[<sup>5</sup>](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5601036/)
